README.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright © Idiap Research Institute <contact@idiap.ch>

SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-only
-->

# Raw Speech Classification

Trains CNN (or any neural network based) classifiers from raw speech using Keras and
tests them. The inputs are lists of wav files, where each file is labelled. It then
creates fixed length signals and processes them. During testing, it computes scores at
the utterance or speaker levels by averaging the corresponding frame-level scores from
the fixed length signals.

## Installation

### From source, In a Conda environment

To install Keras 3 with PyTorch backend, run:

```bash
conda env create -f conda/rsclf-pytorch.yaml
```

To install Keras 3 with TensorFlow backend, run:

```bash
conda env create -f conda/rsclf-tensorflow.yaml
```

Then install the package in that environment (the default name is `rsclf`) with:

```bash
conda run -n rsclf pip install .
```

### Installing from PyPI

If you want to install the last release of this package in your current environment, you
can run the following:

```bash
pip install raw-speech-classification
```

By default it installs with pytorch, but you can install tensorflow if you want to use
it instead. You'll need to set the `KERAS_BACKEND` environment variable to the correct
backend before running `rsclf-train` or `rsclf-test` (see below), or globally for the
current bash session with:

```bash
export KERAS_BACKEND=torch
```

Replace `torch` by `tensorflow` accordingly.

## Using the code

1. Create lists for training, cross-validation and testing.
   Each line in a list must contain the path to a wav file (relative to the `-R` or
   `--root` option), followed by its integer label indexed from 0, separated by a space.
   E.g if your data files are in `/home/bob/data/my_dataset/part*/file*.wav`, the `root`
   option could be `/home/bob/data/my_dataset` and the content of the files would then
   be like:

   ```txt
   part1/file1.wav 1
   part1/file2.wav 0
   ```

   Full list files for IEMOCAP are available in the repository as example in
   [`datasets/IEMOCAP/F1_lists`](datasets/IEMOCAP/F1_lists).

1. **If you installed from source with Conda:** A `run` script is available that
   concatenates all the steps. run [`run.sh`](run.sh). Provide the model architecture as
   an argument. See [`model_architecture.py`](rsclf/model_architecture.py) for valid
   options. Optionally, provide an integer as a count of the number of times the
   experiment is repeated. This is useful when the same experiment needs to be repeated
   multiple times with different initializations. The argument defaults to 1.
   get more info with

   **If you installed with pip:** You can run the following commands (give the `--help`
   option to each command for more details):

   ```bash
   rsclf-wav2feat --wav-list-file list_files/cv.list --feature-dir output/cv_feat --mode train --root path/to/dataset/basedir
   rsclf-wav2feat --wav-list-file list_files/train.list --feature-dir output/train_feat --mode train --root path/to/dataset/basedir
   rsclf-wav2feat --wav-list-file list_files/test.list --feature-dir output/test_feat --mode test --root path/to/dataset/basedir
   KERAS_BACKEND=torch rsclf-train --train-feature-dir output/train_feat --validation-feature-dir output/cv_feat --output-dir output/cnn_subseg --arch subseg --splice-size 25 --verbose 2
   KERAS_BACKEND=torch rsclf-test --feature-dir output/test_feat --model-filename output/cnn_subseg/cnn.keras --output-dir output/cnn_subseg --splice-size 25 --verbose 0
   rsclf-plot --output-dir output/ output/cnn_subseg
   ```

This is an example of how to run on the IEMOCAP dataset using conda assuming conda is
installed in `~/miniconda3` and your environment is `rsclf`:

```bash
bash run.sh -C ~/miniconda3 -n rsclf -D ./datasets/IEMOCAP/F1_lists -a seg -o results/seg-f1 -R <IEMOCAP_ROOT>
```

For instance, `<IEMOCAP_ROOT>` can be `/ssd/data/IEMOCAP` which should
contain `IEMOCAP_full_release/Session*`.

This is an [example](./docs/log.txt) of the log printed to the terminal and you should
obtain the following curve in `results/seg-f1/plot.png`:

![Results](./docs/plot.png)

## Code components

1. [`wav2feat.py`](rsclf/wav2feat.py) creates directories where the wav files are stored
   as fixed length frames for faster access during training and testing.

1. [`train.py`](rsclf/train.py) is the Keras training script.

1. Model architecture can be configured in
   [`model_architecture.py`](rsclf/model_architecture.py).

1. [`rawdataset.py`](rsclf/rawdataset.py) provides an object that reads the saved
   directories in batches and retrieves mini-batches for training.

1. [`test.py`](rsclf/test.py) performs the testing and generates scores as posterior
   probabilities. If you need the results per speaker, configure it accordingly (see the
   script for details). The default output format is:

   ```txt
    <speakerID> <label> [<posterior_probability_vector>]
   ```

1. [`plot.py`](rsclf/plot.py) generates and saves the learning curves.

## Training schedule

The script uses stochastic gradient descent with 0.5 momentum. It starts with a learning
rate of 0.1 for a minimum of 5 epochs. Whenever the validation loss reduces by less than
0.002 between successive epochs, the learning rate is halved. Halving is performed until
the learning rate reaches 1e-7.

## Contributors

Idiap Research Institute

Authors: S. Pavankumar Dubagunta and Dr. Mathew Magimai-Doss

## License

GNU GPL v3

Commit message:

chore(deps): set backend frameworks as optional.
Remove torch from the dependencies and put it in it's own
optional-dependencies section.
Add an optional-dependencies section for tensorflow.

README.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright © Idiap Research Institute <contact@idiap.ch>

SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-only
-->

# Raw Speech Classification

Trains CNN (or any neural network based) classifiers from raw speech using Keras and
tests them. The inputs are lists of wav files, where each file is labelled. It then
creates fixed length signals and processes them. During testing, it computes scores at
the utterance or speaker levels by averaging the corresponding frame-level scores from
the fixed length signals.

## Installation

### From source, In a Conda environment

To install Keras 3 with PyTorch backend, run:

```bash
conda env create -f conda/rsclf-pytorch.yaml
```

To install Keras 3 with TensorFlow backend, run:

```bash
conda env create -f conda/rsclf-tensorflow.yaml
```

Then install the package in that environment (the default name is `rsclf`) with:

```bash
conda run -n rsclf pip install .
```

### Installing from PyPI

If you want to install the last release of this package in your current environment, you
can run either of the following commands depending on your desired framework:

```bash
pip install raw-speech-classification[torch]
```

or

```bash
pip install raw-speech-classification[tensorflow]
```

You'll also need to set the `KERAS_BACKEND` environment variable to the correct backend
before running `rsclf-train` or `rsclf-test` (see below), or globally for the current
bash session with:

```bash
export KERAS_BACKEND=torch
```

Replace `torch` by `tensorflow` accordingly.

## Using the code

1. Create lists for training, cross-validation and testing.
   Each line in a list must contain the path to a wav file (relative to the `-R` or
   `--root` option), followed by its integer label indexed from 0, separated by a space.
   E.g. if your data files are in `/home/bob/data/my_dataset/part*/file*.wav`, the
   `root` option could be `/home/bob/data/my_dataset` and the content of the files would
   then be like:

   ```txt
   part1/file1.wav 1
   part1/file2.wav 0
   ```

   Full list files for IEMOCAP are available in the repository as example in
   [`datasets/IEMOCAP/F1_lists`](datasets/IEMOCAP/F1_lists).

1. **If you installed from source with Conda:** A `run` script is available that
   concatenates all the steps. Run [`run.sh`](run.sh). Provide the model architecture as
   an argument. See [`model_architecture.py`](rsclf/model_architecture.py) for valid
   options. Optionally, provide an integer as a count of the number of times the
   experiment is repeated. This is useful when the same experiment needs to be repeated
   multiple times with different initialization. The argument defaults to 1.

   **If you installed with pip:** You can run the following commands (give the `--help`
   option to each command for more details):

   ```bash
   rsclf-wav2feat --wav-list-file list_files/cv.list --feature-dir output/cv_feat --mode train --root path/to/dataset/basedir
   rsclf-wav2feat --wav-list-file list_files/train.list --feature-dir output/train_feat --mode train --root path/to/dataset/basedir
   rsclf-wav2feat --wav-list-file list_files/test.list --feature-dir output/test_feat --mode test --root path/to/dataset/basedir
   KERAS_BACKEND=torch rsclf-train --train-feature-dir output/train_feat --validation-feature-dir output/cv_feat --output-dir output/cnn_subseg --arch subseg --splice-size 25 --verbose 2
   KERAS_BACKEND=torch rsclf-test --feature-dir output/test_feat --model-filename output/cnn_subseg/cnn.keras --output-dir output/cnn_subseg --splice-size 25 --verbose 0
   rsclf-plot --output-dir output/ output/cnn_subseg
   ```

This is an example of how to run on the IEMOCAP dataset using conda, assuming conda is
installed in `~/miniconda3` and your environment is `rsclf`:

```bash
bash run.sh -C ~/miniconda3 -n rsclf -D ./datasets/IEMOCAP/F1_lists -a seg -o results/seg-f1 -R <IEMOCAP_ROOT>
```

For instance, `<IEMOCAP_ROOT>` can be `/ssd/data/IEMOCAP` which should
contain `IEMOCAP_full_release/Session*`.

This is an [example](./docs/log.txt) of the log printed to the terminal, and you should
obtain the following curve in `results/seg-f1/plot.png`:

![Results](./docs/plot.png)

## Code components

1. [`wav2feat.py`](rsclf/wav2feat.py) creates directories where the wav files are stored
   as fixed length frames for faster access during training and testing.

1. [`train.py`](rsclf/train.py) is the Keras training script.

1. Model architecture can be configured in
   [`model_architecture.py`](rsclf/model_architecture.py).

1. [`rawdataset.py`](rsclf/rawdataset.py) provides an object that reads the saved
   directories in batches and retrieves mini-batches for training.

1. [`test.py`](rsclf/test.py) performs the testing and generates scores as posterior
   probabilities. If you need the results per speaker, configure it accordingly (see the
   script for details). The default output format is:

   ```txt
    <speakerID> <label> [<posterior_probability_vector>]
   ```

1. [`plot.py`](rsclf/plot.py) generates and saves the learning curves.

## Training schedule

The script uses stochastic gradient descent with 0.5 momentum. It starts with a learning
rate of 0.1 for a minimum of 5 epochs. Whenever the validation loss reduces by less than
0.002 between successive epochs, the learning rate is halved. Halving is performed until
the learning rate reaches 1e-7.

## Contributors

Idiap Research Institute

Authors: S. Pavankumar Dubagunta and Dr. Mathew Magimai-Doss

## License

GNU GPL v3
